I guess start briefly describe your background.
With what I have in your letter, I guess you could
just restate part of that again. From a police
standpoint? Just your background. You can give me
any education you've had.
Born in 23, graduated from high school in 41.
Started at TCU on a general...
degree, dropped out, started to go to North Texas
Agricultural College, University of Texas at
Arlington, and dropped out of there.
Went to the jewelry trade and wound up being a
watchmaker for 17 years.
In 59, joined the Fort Worth Waste Department. to
basically two years walking the beat, two years in
youth division, two years in detective office and
the burglary division,
made sergeant
One year in communications for dispatch office,
then went to patrol division. Oh, it was several
years there, 10, 11, 12. I'm not sure right now
which. Then went to records division, wound up as
supervisor of the identification office for the
remaining seven or eight years before
retirement. OK. When you joined the police force
in 59, what was your training like? What was
stressed? The training, at that time, the
training wound up, it was
an eight-week school, 40 hours a week.
They were trying to get across the law,
which involved a number of classroom errors,
naturally.
The department procedures or policies.
First aid was stressed heavily.
I don't think of anything else right now. Driving
wasn't stressed.
It is now.
Knowledge of the town, streets, buildings,
names, this type of thing. But I believe that
covers most of it. What's the training like today?
How do they compare it? There's almost no
comparison. Now they have a 16-week course.
Before they're hired, they're given more
testing, interviews, psychological
evaluations, stress situations. than you can
imagine, and most of them are useless.
But the actual training division now, or training
school, as the rookies go through, involves quite
a bit of time at the firing range, getting familiar
with pistols, and shotguns. Most of that brought
on the Supreme Court decision requiring or
holding departments liable in a vehicle police
shooting where the man might not have been
adequately trained in some court's opinion.
They're given quite a bit of driver's training in
emergency pursuit driving. this type of stuff
basically for the same reason and because the
frequency of accidents involve quite a bit of
money in repair work and downtime for a vehicle
should be in use first aid I don't believe they're
giving any first aid at all now they boast us heavy
with
it laws They're stressed. Department policies
are stressed. Your civil rights or actions that
subject the city to lawsuit are stressed heavy.
Physical training is stressed quite a bit.
They've got a gym and they... have a physical P.E.
class like in high school every day.
But
there's not a whole lot of comparison with what it
was five years ago. Why do you think it changed? A
lot of it is departments or the city's
desire for trying to provide better educated more
educated a more rounded educated officer a lot of
it is because the laws have been interpreted in
such a way that subjects the city to civil
liability so much so I believe One of our attorneys
a while back was telling me at that particular time
we had 25 or 27 separate lawsuits pending in
federal court on civil rights violations, which
in the late 50s and early 60s were never
heard of. And it's subject to quite a bit of
financial stress. Other
reasons would be protest groups hollering,
minority groups stressing employment in their
particular minority.
There would be a variety of other reasons.
More of a, I mean, as far as the city was concerned,
like there's a protection of their own.
Protection of their own.
Okay. You said one of your first assignments was to
the foot patrol in the downtown area. How do you
think the public perceived the police then? That
particular job at that time was described to me,
and I believe they were pretty close to right. It
was basically 75% public relations. The officers
assigned to that detail would stand on a major
downtown intersection directing traffic. The
job was to direct traffic 30 minutes, then walk to
B, which would be, oh, four, six, or eight block
area, getting familiar with the business people,
professional people, and getting to know the
neighborhood and being seen.
It was more of a high visibility job than anything
else. There were some police actions that you took
that just happened to come back.
I believe it was all the probability was 75% public
relations. We thought we did a good job. People
that were around us enjoyed having us to talk to.
But that particular job has been abolished now in
favor of putting more policemen in patrol cars.
How do you think that, well, It's kind of hard to
follow up on that one, but how do you think police
are viewed today, since there's really not that
same job anymore? As a department? As an entity,
how does the public see the police department?
Now, let me break it down a little bit. How do I feel
about it? How does the government feel about it?
How does our department feel about it? How do you
think? the public sees the police department
today? The general public
has
a reasonable amount of respect to the Congress and
the police department. I'm talking about four.
That's all I want to know.
They will support them to a reasonable degree.
Other towns
are more and other towns are less. I believe Fort
Worth would be more or less in the average
on that. Okay. To give you an example,
a number of years ago, This is one back in 2015, 25
years. There were studies made and so forth from
police departments and its inadequacies and
needs. And everybody that was involved in the
study recommended that we have a new police
building. At that time, the police department's
main offices were in the basement of the city hall.
The city council at that time thought that was a
great idea and immediately put it to a bond vote to
build a new city hall. They dropped all
suggestions and the police building was
completed and put it out to the city hall. The bond
vote when the new city hall issue was rejected by
the public. Several years later, another survey
was made, and the prime recommendation of that
study was that we have a new police building, a
centralized police building. The council, which
had changed thought that was a great idea, and
immediately put it out to a bond vote for a new city
hall. Dropped all suggestions to the police
building, but they won the city hall, because then
the police would use an old building if they wanted
to go up. When they released a bond vote by the
people, it was rejected. This makes twice that the
same issue has come up and been rejected. The third
time, would be
maybe 10, 12 years ago. And the thing come up just
exactly like it had before. The public finally
voted for a new city hall after the recommendation
had been made with the new police building. And the
police wound up getting two-thirds of the old city
hall.
Is
this public confidence or public respect or your
city officials who are actual employers of the
police department? This has finally changed
within the last year.
Boat was finally brought up again and they did
build a new police building in connection with the
county jail and within the last year have moved
into a new police building.
Twenty years later.
If at any time you do this you feel like throwing in
something from a previous question you thought of
or just anything, feel free. You said the Fort
Worth police chief usually has risen up from
within the department's own ranks.
And then in 1777 they brought Brown over from
Dallas. What effect did it have when you bring in an
outsider to be the police chief? on the operation
of the force and the attitudes of the officers? The
effect, as far as A.J. Brown was concerned, Brown
was a career man that was a Dallas police officer.
He got his 20 years in and Dallas has a 20-year
retirement plan. Then he could retire and get a job
somewhere else. Then when he reached retirement
age, he started on a Dallas retirement, which
meant that he had to have a job. He wound up as a
police chief in Norfolk, Virginia. Then Fort
Worth hired him from Norfolk to come to Fort Worth.
But he's basically a Dallas trained, Dallas
oriented police officer. He was Nearly all of his
career was assigned to inside jobs and worked very
few investigative or police enforcement jobs on
the street. And when the Fort Worth got him, a
number of
the officers were, I believe, more or less
naturally resentful The city council didn't seem
to feel that our department had a man capable of
being chief.
I believe we did and still do. The council more or
less explained it in
an unpublicized way there had been certain
cliques developed within the police department
that they wanted to bring in on the outside, break
up those cliques, and then within three to five
years, have a chief on the inside back.
This held true in that Brown was here three years.
He brought in several radical ideas, radical to
full worth idiot.
He finally left
more or less at a time of considerable dissension
within the city. And the city officials
promoted a man to chief that had been in the running
for several years, in contention for several
years.
He was chief for five or six years and has just now
officially retired and went back outside and
hired a man from Los Angeles to be their next chief.
In
the late 60s and early 70s, it seemed like civil
rights finally reached Fort Worth as an issue. It
began to make news and be more dominant. What's the
police response to when you have such a major shift
in relations between races? Now, are you talking
about your protest minority groups? Just the
civil rights, not so much the protesting, but the
shifting relations between, you know, your
traditional relations between blacks and whites
or any minority were changing, and how did that
affect the police, or how did the police respond,
or was it a factor at all?
I'm not sure I just understand just exactly what
you're asking me. The way blacks and whites and
anybody got along for decades and decades was
changing. How did that affect? How did the police
respond to this? Did it change anything? Yes, it
changed a whole lot. All of your... Well, it
started out as blacks.
Then it evolved.
Hispanics, and next come the flower children.
And since then, there's been half a dozen splinter
groups of minorities making complaints or
protests or demonstrations of some form. But it
did make a big change in the police department. And
that not just the police department, the city, the
city officials, the courts, the training
division for the recruits,
the employees they hired. It made quite a bit
of difference to us. How would you describe the
difference? Okay, it changed things, but how
would you describe that change? Well, one of the
first
examples to bring up,
used to we had niggers and negroes. The first
minority groups or blacks or whatever they want to
be called, decided they wanted to be called
Negroes, as to
correspond or rhyme with your neat, Negroes.
Don't call them niggers, call them Negroes. The
next group come along said, we don't want to be
called Negroes, we're Negroes as a race, we are a
color, we are colored people.
It wasn't a year later until they decided, well, we
are colored, but we're black. Now we want to be
called black people. We had a
session there, or not a session, but a series of
sensitivity sessions. That's a joke if there ever
was. But in bringing those up, we had a supposed to
have been a highly respected professor from the
college. And in the classroom discussion, we
asked him, what would you call them? They don't
even want to, they don't know what they want to be
called in himself. He said, well, if I was talking
to somebody one-on-one, In the first sentence, I
would address him as a colored person, as a Negro
person, and as a black person, and see which one he
responded to best, and then that's the way I would
address him from then on. I got a lot of hit people.
The sensitivity sessions were to take, you had a
militant blacks and a group of policemen, that was
supposed to be representative of the police
department, and sit them in one room, the
policemen were to be quiet, sit still, and not let
themselves get upset, and the blacks were to call
them every name under the sun that they could think
of for eight hours. And yet, if they made one word of
complaint, they received a disciplinary letter
in their personnel file.
That was to go on for a week at a time. Naturally,
there was some hard beatings over those.
That's what happened. That's hard to believe,
that part. It's fact.
How long did that continue? I mean, the
sensitivity? Different groups under different
names with different lengths of time in
attendance. Approximately two years.
Assuming there was no... Oh, this was the thing to
do. Everybody was doing this. This was to educate
the policeman as to how the blacks felt when he was
called a black or a colored person or a negro or a
nigger or a motherfucker. That's... So we'd know
how they felt.
This may seem a silly question, but you... There
was no gain as far as the police were concerned from
this? It seemed like it just generated hard
feelings. I believe hard feelings only did
generate. We had a number of the policemen come
back that had been sent to one of those schools and
say, I'm not going back or I'm going to quit. You can
do what you want to with the chief, but I ain't going
back to another one of those places.
There was never anybody fired for not going.
When
civil rights first became an issue in Fort Worth,
were there any blacks in the force at that time?
Yeah. What were their opinions? Did they ever make
a public stance? No. NAACP wouldn't allow that.
What did they do? How did they respond? At that
time, we didn't have anywhere near the proportion
of blacks. on the department there must have been
say 12 or 15 this is when we had a department of 300
personnel uh
mostly they were assigned to black communities
because that's where they knew the people and the
people knew them everyone that ever got fired or
had personnel problems
the issue was over females every black policeman
we had that was killed was killed by his wife
up until oh probably 65 68 somewhere along that
because he wasn't in the business
Since then, we've had more police, more blacks,
more females, more Hispanics, now Asiatics, and
so forth hired. And other issues have come into it,
but
that's kind of the background of what it was.
As the number of blacks on the force increased, the
proportion increased, How did that change the
relationship between blacks and whites on the
floors? It seemed like it was a... Some good, some
bad. We've been forced through threats,
threats of a quota system, threats from the city
manager, threats from the council
regarding personnel or pay raises. One thing or
another,
more
emphasis being placed on recruitment of
minorities.
Federal grants get involved.
When money's involved, things get serious.
Some of the minorities that we hire are good. A lot
of them are hired for, to fill a quota, or if there is
no quota, to make it look close to
one.
A lot of the blacks that we have hired aren't worth a
damn and they're being carried on the table just
because they're black.
You can't fire them as easily as you can a wife.
Females that we've
hired
Less than 50% of them are effective police
officers. The other 50% are hired to, not hired,
but they are placed in jobs that any clerk can
handle. But they're a police officer and going to a
police officer's salary. And they're incapable
of being a police officer.
And I believe that That percentage would even be
higher among the black females. Hispanics, I
don't know about them, but I
don't know many of them. Let's see. One time
before, not recently, but a while back, we were
talking, and you mentioned that the NAACP
wouldn't pursue any litigation that involved a
black officer. They limit themselves to only
action about the white police.
What's a policeman to think when something like
that happens? Only limit our action to just this.